EXCEL
EXCEL!   EXCEL  EXCEL   EXCEL   EXCEL   INTRODUCTION

Excel is typically used for:

Analysis
Data entry
Data management
Accounting
Budgeting
Data analysis
Visuals and graphs
Programming
Financial modeling
And much, much more!


-- The Sheet explained
The Sheet is a set of rows and columns. It forms the same pattern as we have in math exercise books, the rectangle boxes formed by the pattern are called cells.

-- Note: You can also select the entire spreadsheet by pressing Ctrl+A for Windows, or Cmd+A for MacOS.

-- There are two ways to select a range of cells

Name Box
Drag to mark a range.

-- Filling
Filling makes your life easier and is used to fill ranges with values, so that you do not have to type manual entries.

-- Filling can be used for:

Copying
Sequences
Dates
Functions (*)

-- Fill Sequences
Filling can be used to create sequences. A sequence is an order or a pattern. We can use the filling function to continue the order that has been set.

-- Sequences can for example be used on numbers and dates.

-- The difference between cutting and copying, is that cutting removes the originals, while copying leaves the originals.

-- Adding New Rows
Rows can also be added and deleted. You access the menu by right clicking the row number. New rows are added to the same place you clicked.

-- The total is called SUM in Excel.

There are two ways to calculate the SUM.

Adding cells
SUM function

-- Relative and Absolute References

Excel has two types of references:

Relative references
Absolute references

Absolute reference is a choice we make. It is a command which tells Excel to lock a reference.

The dollar sign ($) is used to make references absolute.

Example of relative reference: A1

Example of absolute reference: $A$1
The dollar sign has three different states:

Absolute for column and row. The reference is absolutely locked.
Example =$A$1

Absolute for the column. The reference is locked to that column. The row remains relative.
Example =$A1

Absolute for the row. The reference is locked to that row. The column remains relative.
Example =A$1

-- EXCEL ARITHMETIC OPERATORS
ADDITION
SUBSTACTION
MULTIPLICATION
DIVISION

-- Parentheses
Using parentheses makes Excel do the calculation for the numbers inside the parentheses first, before calculating the rest of the formula.

Parentheses are added by typing () on both sides of numbers, like (1+2).

-- EXCEL FORMATTING:
Formatting is used to make spreadsheets more readable. There are many ways to add styles. The most common ones are; Color, Font, Number format and Grids.


Hexadecimal Colors
Excel supports Hexadecimal color values

A hexadecimal color is specified with: #RRGGBB.

RR (red), GG (green) and BB (blue) are hexadecimal integers between 00 and FF specifying the intensity of the color.

Font Name
The default font in Excel is Calibri.

The font name can be changed for both numbers and text.

Why change the font name in Excel?

Make the data easier to read
Make the presentation more appeaL

Fonts can be changed in four different ways: color, font name, size and other characteristics. The fonts are changed to make the spreadsheet more readable and delicate.


Number Formats
The default Number format is General.

Why change number formats?

Make data explainable
Prepare data for functions, so that Excel understands what kind of data you are working with.
Examples of number formats:

General
Number
Currency
Time

Grids
By default, gridlines are displayed in Excel.

However, grids can be removed.

Why remove grids?

Make the spreadsheet more readable
Make the spreadsheet more delicate

EXCEL DATA ANALYSIS:

Excel Sorting
Ranges can be sorted using the Sort Ascending and Sort Descending commands.

When sorting multiple columns, it will always sort by the first column (leftmost).

-- Excel Filter
Filters can be applied to sort and hide data. It makes data analysis easier.

-- Table Design
Tables can be customized and styled in a few clicks.

Converting a range into a table gives access to a menu called "Table Design".

-- Table Resizing
The size of a table can be changed.

Resizing is to increase or decrease the range of the table.

There are three ways to resize a table

Resize table command
Drag to resize
Adding headers

-- Removing duplicates are helpful when cleaning a dataset and you do not want to include copies.

-- Table Style
Excel has many ready to use styles which can be applied for tables.

Table styles is to change the appearance of the table.

It can be changed to:

Make it easier to read and understand
Make it look better
The table style is Blue, Table Style Medium 2 by default.

-- Conditional Formatting
Conditional formatting is used to change the appearance of cells in a range based on your specified conditions.

The conditions are rules based on specified numerical values or matching text.

-- HCR: HIGHLIGHT CELL RULE
Duplicate Values.. is one of the options for the condition, and can check for both duplicate and unique values.

EXCEL BAR;
COLOR SCALE;
ICON SET;
MANAGE RULE;

Excel Charts
Charts are visual representations of data used to make it more understandable.

Commonly used charts are:

Pie chart
Column chart
Line chart

Clustered Bar Chart
Clustered Bar charts are used when the value of data is important but the order is not.

Stacked Bar Chart
Stacked bar charts are used to highlights the total amount of contribution for each category.

This is done by stacking the bars at the end of each other.

The charts are used when you have more than one data column.


Pie Charts
Pie charts arrange the data as slices in a circle.

Pie charts are used for representing values of qualitative (categorical) data.

Pie charts show the contribution of each category to the total.

Excel has two types of pie charts:

2-D pie ()
Doughnut ()

2-D Pie Chart
Pie charts arrange the data as slices in a circle.

2-D pie charts are used when you only have one data column.

Doughnut Chart
Doughnut charts arrange the data as slices in a circle with hollow center.

Doughnut charts are often used when you have more than one data column.

Radar chart is also known as web chart, spider chart and star chart.

Charts in Excel can be customized.

Customization can be helpful to make the data easier to understand. For example to highlight key points, give additional information and make it look better.

How to move a chart, step by step:

Select the chart by clicking on it.
Drag the chart and place it where you want

Excel charts can be resized.

Resizing will scale all the elements in the chart except the text.

How to resize a chart, step by step:

Select the chart by clicking on it.

Click and drag one of the 8 points shown on the chart border and drag them

Changing the title, step by step:

Double click on the chart
This opens up a menu on the right side of your screen.

Find "Chart Title" text in the newly opened menu and change it

Charts can be customized in different ways, here are some elements you can change:

Legends
Axis
Data labels
Grid lines
Styling and formatting


PivotTable
PivotTable is a functionality in Excel which helps you organize and analyze data.

It lets you add and remove values, perform calculations, and to filter and sort data sets.

PivotTable helps you structure and organize data to understand large data sets.

How a PivotTable Works
PivotTables have four main components:
1. Column
2. Rows
3. Filter
4. Values


The AND function is a premade function in Excel, which returns TRUE or FALSE based on two or more conditions.

The conditions can check things like:

If a number is greater than another number >
If a number is smaller than another number <
If a number or text is equal to something =

Note: Text values needs to be in quotes: " "

Combining the AND function with an IF function lets you check multiple conditions for the IF function

Combining the AND function with an IF function lets you check multiple conditions for the IF function:

The AVERAGEIF function is a premade function in Excel, which calculates the average of a range based on a true or false condition.

The AVERAGEIFS function is a premade function in Excel, which calculates the average of a range based on one or more true or false condition.

It is typed =AVERAGEIFS:

=AVERAGEIFS(averag


To concatenate is to link something together.

CONCAT is a function in Excel and is short for concatenate.

The CONCAT function is used to link multiple cells without adding any delimiters between the combined cell values.

It is typed =CONCAT
Note: The different parts of the function are separated by a symbol, like comma , or semicolon

The COUNT function is a premade function in Excel, which counts cells with numbers in a range.

It is typed =COUNT

Note: The COUNT function only counts cells with numbers, not cells with letters. The COUNTA function is better used if the cells have letters.

The COUNTA function is a premade function in Excel, which counts all cells in a range that has values, both numbers and letters.

It is typed =COUNTA

The COUNTBLANK function is a premade function in Excel, which counts blank cells in a range.

It is typed =COUNTBLANK

COUNTIF Function
The COUNTIF function is a premade function in Excel, which counts cells as specified.

The COUNTIF function can have basic or more advanced uses. This covers the basic use for how to count specific numbers and words.

The COUNTIFS function is a premade function in Excel, which counts cells in a range based on one or more true or false condition.

The IF function is a premade function in Excel, which returns values based on a true or false condition.
It is typed =IF and has 3 parts:

The IFS function is a premade function in Excel, which returns values based on one or more true or false conditions.

The LEFT function is used to retrieve a chosen amount of characters, counting from the left side of an Excel cell. The chosen number has to be greater than 0 and is set to 1 by default.

It is typed =LEFT


-- The LOWER function is used to lowercase text in a cell.

== Changing the letter case of your cell values can be great when there is a lot of case inconsistency among the cell inputs or when preparing your dataset for case-sensitive usage.

It is typed =LOWER

=-- The MAX function is a premade function in Excel, which finds the highest number in a range

-=-- The MEDIAN function is a premade function in Excel, which returns the middle value in the data

The MIN function is a premade function in Excel, which finds the lowest number in a range

The MODE function is a premade function in Excel, which is used to find the number seen most times.

This function always returns a single number.

The OR function is a premade function in Excel, which returns TRUE or FALSE based on two or more conditions.

Combining the OR function with an IF function lets you check multiple conditions for the IF function:
The IF function lets you specify the return values.

The RAND function is used to generate random numbers.

It is typed =RAND

The RIGHT function is used to retrieve a chosen amount of characters, counting from the right side of an Excel cell. The chosen number has to be greater than 0 and is set to 1 by default.

It is typed =RIGHT

The STDEV.P function is a premade function in Excel, which calculates the Standard Deviation (Std) for the entire population.

It is typed =STDEV.P

The STDEV.S function is a premade function in Excel, which calculates the Standard Deviation (Std) for a sample.

It is typed =STDEV.S

The TRIM function is premade in Excel and used to remove irregular text spacing and keep single spaces between words

The VLOOKUP function is a premade function in Excel, which allows searches across columns.

The XOR function is a premade function in Excel, which returns TRUE or FALSE based on two or more conditions.


Time can be converted into seconds using Excel.

The number 86400 can be used to convert time to seconds.

NPV (Net Present Value) is a financial formula used to discount future cash flows.

The Remove Duplicates function Remove duplicates button is used to remove duplicate entries.

It is used for:

web development (server-side),
software development,
mathematics,
system scripting.

Python was designed for readability, and has some similarities to the English language with influence from mathematics.

Python uses new lines to complete a command, as opposed to other programming languages which often use semicolons or parentheses.
Python relies on indentation, using whitespace, to define scope; such as the scope of loops, functions and classes.